reporting.md, before:

%%%

   Title = "SMTP TLS Reporting"
   abbrev = "SMTP-TLSRPT"
   category = "std"
   docName = "draft-ietf-uta-smtp-tlsrpt-00"
   ipr = "trust200902"
   area = "Applications"
   workgroup = "Using TLS in Applications"
   keyword = [""]

   date = 2016-04-18T00:00:00Z

   [[author]]
   initials="D."
   surname="Margolis"
   fullname="Daniel Margolis"
   organization="Google, Inc"
     [author.address]
     email="dmargolis (at) google.com"
   [[author]]
   initials="A."
   surname="Brotman"
   fullname="Alexander Brotman"
   organization="Comcast, Inc"
     [author.address]
     email="alexander_brotman (at) cable.comcast (dot com)"
   [[author]]
   initials="B."
   surname="Ramakrishnan"
   fullname="Binu Ramakrishnan"
   organization="Yahoo!, Inc"
     [author.address]
     email="rbinu (at) yahoo-inc (dot com)"
   [[author]]
   initials="J."
   surname="Jones"
   fullname="Janet Jones"
   organization="Microsoft, Inc"
     [author.address]
     email="janet.jones (at) microsoft (dot com)"
   [[author]]
   initials="M."
   surname="Risher"
   fullname="Mark Risher"
   organization="Google, Inc"
     [author.address]
     email="risher (at) google (dot com)"

%%%

.# Abstract

SMTP Mail Transfer Agents often conduct encrypted communication through the use
of Transport Layer Security (TLS). Because the STARTTLS protocol employs
opportunistic encryption, "Man-in-the-Middle" intermediaries can interfere with
the successful establishment of suitable encryption in ways that may not be
detectable by the receiving server. This document provides transparency into
failures in SMTP MTA Strict Transport Security (TODO: Add ref), STARTTLS
[@!RFC3207], and the DNS-Based Authentication of Named Entities (DANE,
[@!RFC6698]).


{mainmatter}


# Introduction

The STARTTLS extension to SMTP [@!RFC3207] allows SMTP clients and hosts to
establish secure SMTP sessions over TLS. The protocol design is based on
"Opportunistic Security" (OS) [@!RFC7435], which provides interoperability for
clients that do not support it, but means that any attacker who can delete
parts of the SMTP session (such as the "250 STARTTLS" response) or who can
redirect the entire SMTP session (perhaps by overwriting the resolved MX record
of the delivery domain) can perform such a downgrade or interception attack.

Because such "downgrade attacks" are not necessarily apparent to the receiving
MTA, this document defines a mechanism for sending domains to report on
failures at multiple parts of the MTA-to-MTA conversation.

Specifically, this document defines a reporting schema that covers failures 
in routing, STARTTLS negotiation, and both DANE [@!RFC7671] and STS (TODO: Add
ref) policy validation errors.

Implementers establish a policy by publishing a TXT record in the DNS which
instructs compliant sending MTAs to deliver reports of delivery and STARTTLS
failures in the appropriate format to the specified endpoint.

This document is intended as a companion to the specification for SMTP MTA 
Strict Transport Security (MTA-STS, TODO: Add ref).

## Terminology

The keywords **MUST**, **MUST NOT**, **REQUIRED**, **SHALL**, **SHALL NOT**,
**SHOULD**, **SHOULD NOT**, **RECOMMENDED**, **MAY**, and **OPTIONAL**, when
they appear in this document, are to be interpreted as described in [@!RFC2119].

We also define the following terms for further use in this document:

  * STS Policy: A definition of the expected TLS availability and behavior, as
    well as the desired actions for a given domain when a sending MTA encounters
    different results.
  * TLSRPT Policy: A policy detailing the endpoint for sending MTAs should to
    deliver reports 
  * Policy Domain: The domain against which an STS Policy is defined.
  * Sending MTA: The MTA initiating the delivery of an email message.


# Related Technologies
  * This document is intended as a companion to the specification for SMTP MTA
    Strict Transport Security (MTA-STS, TODO: Add ref).
  * The Public Key Pinning Extension for HTTP [@!RFC7469] contains a JSON-based
    definition for reporting individual pin validation failures.
  * The Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance (DMARC)
    [@!RFC7489] contains an XML-based reporting format for aggregate and
    detailed email delivery errors.


# Reporting Policy

SMTP TLSRPT policies are distributed via DNS from the Policy Domain's zone,
either through a new resource record, or as TXT records (similar to DMARC
policies) under the name `_smtp_tlsrpt`. (Current implementations deploy as TXT
records.) For example, for the Policy Domain `example.com`, the recipient's
SMTP STS policy can be retrieved from `_smtp_tlsrpt.example.com`.

(Future implementations may move to alternate methods of policy discovery or
distribution. See the section _Future_ _Work_ for more discussion.)

Policies consist of the following directives:

   * `v`: This value MUST be equal to `TLSRPT1`.
   * `rua`: A URI specifying the endpoint to which aggregate
     information about policy failures should be sent (see the section
     _Reporting Schema_ for more information). Two URI schemes are supported:
     `mailto` and `https`.
	 * In the case of `https`, reports should be submitted via POST
     ([@!RFC2818]) to the specified URI.
 	 * In the case of `mailto`, reports should be submitted to the specified
     email address. When sending failure reports via SMTP, sending MTAs MUST
     NOT honor SMTP STS or DANE TLSA failures.
   * `ruf`: Future use. (There may also be a need for enabling
     more detailed "forensic" reporting during initial stages of a deployment.
     To address this, the authors consider the possibility of an optional
     additional "forensic reporting mode" in which more details--such as
     certificate chains and MTA banners--may be reported. See the section
     _Future_ _Work_ for more details.)


## Example Reporting Policy

### Report using MAILTO:

```_smtp_tlsrpt.mail.example.com. IN TXT \
		"v:TLSRPT1;rua:mailto:reports@example.com"
```

### Report using HTTPS:

```_smtp_tlsrpt.mail.example.com. IN TXT \
		"v:TLSRPT1; \
		rua:https://reporting.example.com/v1/tlsrpt"
```

# Reporting Schema

Aggregate reports contain the following fields:

* _Report metadata_: 
	* The organization responsible for the report
	* Contact information for one or more responsible parties for the contents 
	of the report
	* A unique identifier for the report
	* The reporting date range for the report
* _Policy_, consisting of: 
	* One of the following policy types:
		* The SMTP MTA STS policy applied (as a string)
		* The DANE TLSA record applied (as a string)
		* The literal string `no-policy-found`, if neither a TLSA nor MTA-STS
		policy could be found.
	* The domain for which the policy is applied
	* The MX host
	* An identifier for the policy (where applicable)
* _Aggregate counts_, comprising _result type_, _sending MTA IP_, _receiving
  MTA hostname_, _message count_, and an optional _additional information_
  field containing a URI for recipients to review further information on a
  failure type.

Note that the failure types are non-exclusive; an aggregate report MAY contain
overlapping `counts` of failure types where a single send attempt encountered
multiple errors.


## Result Types

The list of result types will start with the minimal set below, and is expected
  to grow over time based on real-world experience. The initial set is:

### Success Type
  * `success`: This indicates that the sending MTA was able to successfully
    negotiate a policy-compliant TLS connection, and serves to provide a
    "heartbeat" to receiving domains that reporting is functional and
    tabulating correctly.

  
### Routing Failures
  * `mx-mismatch`: This indicates that the MX resolved for the recipient domain
    did not match the MX constraint specified in the policy.
  * `certificate-mismatch`: This indicates that the certificate presented by the
    receiving MX did not match the MX hostname

### Negotiation Failures

  * `starttls-not-supported`: This indicates that the recipient MX did not
    support STARTTLS.
  * `invalid-certificate`: This indicates that the certificate presented by the
    receiving MX did not validate.
  * `certificate-mismatch`: This indicates that the certificate presented did 
  	not adhere to the constraints specified in the STS or DANE policy, e.g. if 
	the CN field did not match the hostname of the MX.
  * `expired-certificate`: This indicates that the certificate has expired.

### Policy Failures
	
#### DANE-specific Policy Failures
  * `tlsa-invalid`: This indicates a validation error in the TLSA record 
  	associated with a DANE policy.
  * `dnssec-invalid`: This indicates a failure to authenticate DNS records for a
    Policy Domain with a published TLSA record.

#### STS-specific Policy Failures
  * `sts-invalid`: This indicates a validation error for the overall MTA-STS 
  	policy.
  * `webpki-invalid`: This indicates that the MTA-STS policy could not be 
  	authenticated using PKIX validation. 



# IANA Considerations

There are no IANA considerations at this time.


# Security Considerations

SMTP TLS Reporting provides transparency into misconfigurations and attempts to
intercept or tamper with mail between hosts who support STARTTLS. There are
several security risks presented by the existence of this reporting channel:

  * _Flooding of the Aggregate report URI (rua) endpoint_: An attacker could
    flood the endpoint and prevent the receiving domain from accepting
    additional reports. This type of Denial-of-Service attack would limit
    visibility into STARTTLS failures, leaving the receiving domain blind to an
    ongoing attack.

  * _Untrusted content_: An attacker could inject malicious code into the
    report, opening a vulnerability in the receiving domain. Implementers are
    advised to take precautions against evaluating the contents of the report.

  * _Report snooping_: An attacker could create a bogus TLSRPT record to
    receive statistics about a domain the attacker does not own. Since an
    attacker able to poison DNS is already able to receive counts of SMTP
    connections (and, in fact, actual SMTP message payloads) today, this does
    not present a significant new vulnerability.


# Appendix 1: JSON Report Schema

The JSON schema is derived from the HPKP JSON schema [@!RFC7469] (cf. Section 3)

```
{
  "organization-name": organization-name,
  "date-range": {
	"start-datetime": date-time,
	"end-datetime": date-time
  },
  "contact-info": email-address,
  "report-id": report-id,
  "policy": {
	"policy-type": policy-type,
	"policy-string": policy-string,
	"policy-domain": domain,
	"mx-host": mx-host-pattern
	},
  "report-items": [
	{
	  "result-type": result-type,
	  "sending-mta-ip": ip-address,
	  "receiving-mx-hostname": receiving-mx-hostname,
	  "message-count": message-count,
	  "additional-information": additional-info-uri
	}
  ]
}
```
Figure: JSON Report Format

  * `organization-name`: The name of the organization responsible for the
    report. It is provided as a string.
  * `date-time`: The date-time indicates the start- and end-times for the
    report range. It is provided as a string formatted according to
   Section 5.6, "Internet Date/Time Format", of [@!RFC3339].
  * `email-address`: The contact information for a responsible party of the
    report. It is provided as a string formatted according to Section 3.4.1,
    "Addr-Spec", of [@!RFC5322].
  * `report-id`: A unique identifier for the report. Report authors may use
    whatever scheme they prefer to generate a unique identifier. It is provided
    as a string.
  * `policy-type`: The type of policy that was applied by the sending domain.
    Presently, the only two valid choices are `tlsa` and `sts`. It is provided
    as a string.
  * `policy-string`: The string serialization of the policy, whether TLSA
    record or STS policy. Any linefeeds from the original policy MUST be
    replaced with [SP]. TODO: Help with specifics.
  * `domain`: The Policy Domain upon which the policy was applied. For messages
    sent to `user@example.com` this field would contain `example.com`. It is
    provided as a string.
  * `mx-host-pattern`: The pattern of MX hostnames from the applied policy. It
    is provided as a string, and is interpreted in the same manner as the
    "Checking of Wildcard Certificates" rules in Section 6.4.3 of [@!RFC6125].
  * `result-type`: A value from the _Result Types_ section above.
  * `ip-address`: The IP address of the sending MTA that attempted the STARTTLS
    connection. It is provided as a string representation of an IPv4 or IPv6
    address.
  * `receiving-mx-hostname`: The hostname of the receiving MTA MX record with
    which the sending MTA attempted to negotiate a STARTTLS connection.
  * `message-count`: The number of (attempted) messages that match the relevant
    `result-type` for this section.
  * `additional-info-uri`: An optional URI pointing to additional information
    around the relevant `result-type`. For example, this URI might host the
    complete certificate chain presented during an attempted STARTTLS session.


# Appendix 2: Example JSON Report
```
{
	"organization-name": "Company-X",
	"date-range": {
		"start-datetime": "2016-04-01T00:00:00Z",
		"end-datetime": "2016-04-01T23:59:59Z"
	},
	"contact-info": "sts-reporting@company-x.com",
	"report-id": "5065427c-23d3-47ca-b6e0-946ea0e8c4be",
	"policy": {
		"policy-type": "sts",
		"policy-string": "TODO: Add me",
		"policy-domain": "company-y.com",
		"mx-host": "*.mail.company-y.com"
	},
	"report-items": [{
		"result-type": "ExpiredCertificate",
		"sending-mta-ip": "98.136.216.25",
		"receiving-mx-hostname": "mx1.mail.company-y.com",
		"message-count": 100
	}, {
		"result-type": "StarttlsNotSupported",
		"sending-mta-ip": "98.22.33.99",
		"receiving-mx-hostname": "mx2.mail.company-y.com",
		"message-count": 200,
		"additional-information": "hxxps://reports.company-x.com/
                  report_info?id=5065427c-23d3#StarttlsNotSupported"
	}]
}
```
Figure: Example JSON report for a messages from Company-X to Company-Y, where 
100 messages were attempted to Company Y servers with an expired certificate 
and 200 messages were attempted to Company Y servers that did not successfully
respond to the `STARTTLS` command.



{backmatter}

Commit message:

added note about delivery with errors

reporting.md, after:

%%%

   Title = "SMTP TLS Reporting"
   abbrev = "SMTP-TLSRPT"
   category = "std"
   docName = "draft-ietf-uta-smtp-tlsrpt-00"
   ipr = "trust200902"
   area = "Applications"
   workgroup = "Using TLS in Applications"
   keyword = [""]

   date = 2016-04-18T00:00:00Z

   [[author]]
   initials="D."
   surname="Margolis"
   fullname="Daniel Margolis"
   organization="Google, Inc"
     [author.address]
     email="dmargolis (at) google.com"
   [[author]]
   initials="A."
   surname="Brotman"
   fullname="Alexander Brotman"
   organization="Comcast, Inc"
     [author.address]
     email="alexander_brotman (at) cable.comcast (dot com)"
   [[author]]
   initials="B."
   surname="Ramakrishnan"
   fullname="Binu Ramakrishnan"
   organization="Yahoo!, Inc"
     [author.address]
     email="rbinu (at) yahoo-inc (dot com)"
   [[author]]
   initials="J."
   surname="Jones"
   fullname="Janet Jones"
   organization="Microsoft, Inc"
     [author.address]
     email="janet.jones (at) microsoft (dot com)"
   [[author]]
   initials="M."
   surname="Risher"
   fullname="Mark Risher"
   organization="Google, Inc"
     [author.address]
     email="risher (at) google (dot com)"

%%%

.# Abstract

SMTP Mail Transfer Agents often conduct encrypted communication through the use
of Transport Layer Security (TLS). Because the STARTTLS protocol employs
opportunistic encryption, "Man-in-the-Middle" intermediaries can interfere with
the successful establishment of suitable encryption in ways that may not be
detectable by the receiving server. This document provides transparency into
failures in SMTP MTA Strict Transport Security (TODO: Add ref), STARTTLS
[@!RFC3207], and the DNS-Based Authentication of Named Entities (DANE,
[@!RFC6698]).


{mainmatter}


# Introduction

The STARTTLS extension to SMTP [@!RFC3207] allows SMTP clients and hosts to
establish secure SMTP sessions over TLS. The protocol design is based on
"Opportunistic Security" (OS) [@!RFC7435], which provides interoperability for
clients that do not support it, but means that any attacker who can delete
parts of the SMTP session (such as the "250 STARTTLS" response) or who can
redirect the entire SMTP session (perhaps by overwriting the resolved MX record
of the delivery domain) can perform such a downgrade or interception attack.

Because such "downgrade attacks" are not necessarily apparent to the receiving
MTA, this document defines a mechanism for sending domains to report on
failures at multiple parts of the MTA-to-MTA conversation.

Specifically, this document defines a reporting schema that covers failures 
in routing, STARTTLS negotiation, and both DANE [@!RFC7671] and STS (TODO: Add
ref) policy validation errors.

Implementers establish a policy by publishing a TXT record in the DNS which
instructs compliant sending MTAs to deliver reports of delivery and STARTTLS
failures in the appropriate format to the specified endpoint.

This document is intended as a companion to the specification for SMTP MTA 
Strict Transport Security (MTA-STS, TODO: Add ref).

## Terminology

The keywords **MUST**, **MUST NOT**, **REQUIRED**, **SHALL**, **SHALL NOT**,
**SHOULD**, **SHOULD NOT**, **RECOMMENDED**, **MAY**, and **OPTIONAL**, when
they appear in this document, are to be interpreted as described in [@!RFC2119].

We also define the following terms for further use in this document:

  * STS Policy: A definition of the expected TLS availability and behavior, as
    well as the desired actions for a given domain when a sending MTA encounters
    different results.
  * TLSRPT Policy: A policy detailing the endpoint for sending MTAs should to
    deliver reports 
  * Policy Domain: The domain against which an STS Policy is defined.
  * Sending MTA: The MTA initiating the delivery of an email message.


# Related Technologies
  * This document is intended as a companion to the specification for SMTP MTA
    Strict Transport Security (MTA-STS, TODO: Add ref).
  * The Public Key Pinning Extension for HTTP [@!RFC7469] contains a JSON-based
    definition for reporting individual pin validation failures.
  * The Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance (DMARC)
    [@!RFC7489] contains an XML-based reporting format for aggregate and
    detailed email delivery errors.


# Reporting Policy

SMTP TLSRPT policies are distributed via DNS from the Policy Domain's zone,
either through a new resource record, or as TXT records (similar to DMARC
policies) under the name `_smtp_tlsrpt`. (Current implementations deploy as TXT
records.) For example, for the Policy Domain `example.com`, the recipient's
SMTP STS policy can be retrieved from `_smtp_tlsrpt.example.com`.

(Future implementations may move to alternate methods of policy discovery or
distribution. See the section _Future_ _Work_ for more discussion.)

Policies consist of the following directives:

   * `v`: This value MUST be equal to `TLSRPT1`.
   * `rua`: A URI specifying the endpoint to which aggregate
     information about policy failures should be sent (see the section
     _Reporting Schema_ for more information). Two URI schemes are supported:
     `mailto` and `https`.
	 * In the case of `https`, reports should be submitted via POST
     ([@!RFC2818]) to the specified URI.
 	 * In the case of `mailto`, reports should be submitted to the specified
     email address. When sending failure reports via SMTP, sending MTAs MUST
     NOT honor SMTP STS or DANE TLSA failures.
   * `ruf`: Future use. (There may also be a need for enabling
     more detailed "forensic" reporting during initial stages of a deployment.
     To address this, the authors consider the possibility of an optional
     additional "forensic reporting mode" in which more details--such as
     certificate chains and MTA banners--may be reported. See the section
     _Future_ _Work_ for more details.)


## Example Reporting Policy

### Report using MAILTO:

```_smtp_tlsrpt.mail.example.com. IN TXT \
		"v:TLSRPT1;rua:mailto:reports@example.com"
```

### Report using HTTPS:

```_smtp_tlsrpt.mail.example.com. IN TXT \
		"v:TLSRPT1; \
		rua:https://reporting.example.com/v1/tlsrpt"
```

# Reporting Schema

Aggregate reports contain the following fields:

* _Report metadata_: 
	* The organization responsible for the report
	* Contact information for one or more responsible parties for the contents 
	of the report
	* A unique identifier for the report
	* The reporting date range for the report
* _Policy_, consisting of: 
	* One of the following policy types:
		* The SMTP MTA STS policy applied (as a string)
		* The DANE TLSA record applied (as a string)
		* The literal string `no-policy-found`, if neither a TLSA nor MTA-STS
		policy could be found.
	* The domain for which the policy is applied
	* The MX host
	* An identifier for the policy (where applicable)
* _Aggregate counts_, comprising _result type_, _sending MTA IP_, _receiving
  MTA hostname_, _message count_, and an optional _additional information_
  field containing a URI for recipients to review further information on a
  failure type.

Note that the failure types are non-exclusive; an aggregate report MAY contain
overlapping `counts` of failure types where a single send attempt encountered
multiple errors.


## Result Types

The list of result types will start with the minimal set below, and is expected
  to grow over time based on real-world experience. The initial set is:

### Success Type
  * `success`: This indicates that the sending MTA was able to successfully
    negotiate a policy-compliant TLS connection, and serves to provide a
    "heartbeat" to receiving domains that reporting is functional and
    tabulating correctly.

  
### Routing Failures
  * `mx-mismatch`: This indicates that the MX resolved for the recipient domain
    did not match the MX constraint specified in the policy.
  * `certificate-mismatch`: This indicates that the certificate presented by the
    receiving MX did not match the MX hostname

### Negotiation Failures

  * `starttls-not-supported`: This indicates that the recipient MX did not
    support STARTTLS.
  * `invalid-certificate`: This indicates that the certificate presented by the
    receiving MX did not validate.
  * `certificate-mismatch`: This indicates that the certificate presented did 
  	not adhere to the constraints specified in the STS or DANE policy, e.g. if 
	the CN field did not match the hostname of the MX.
  * `expired-certificate`: This indicates that the certificate has expired.

### Policy Failures
	
#### DANE-specific Policy Failures
  * `tlsa-invalid`: This indicates a validation error in the TLSA record 
  	associated with a DANE policy.
  * `dnssec-invalid`: This indicates a failure to authenticate DNS records for a
    Policy Domain with a published TLSA record.

#### STS-specific Policy Failures
  * `sts-invalid`: This indicates a validation error for the overall MTA-STS 
  	policy.
  * `webpki-invalid`: This indicates that the MTA-STS policy could not be 
  	authenticated using PKIX validation. 


# Report Delivery

Note that, When sending failure reports via SMTP, sending MTAs MUST NOT 
honor SMTP STS or DANE TLSA failures.


# IANA Considerations

There are no IANA considerations at this time.


# Security Considerations

SMTP TLS Reporting provides transparency into misconfigurations and attempts to
intercept or tamper with mail between hosts who support STARTTLS. There are
several security risks presented by the existence of this reporting channel:

  * _Flooding of the Aggregate report URI (rua) endpoint_: An attacker could
    flood the endpoint and prevent the receiving domain from accepting
    additional reports. This type of Denial-of-Service attack would limit
    visibility into STARTTLS failures, leaving the receiving domain blind to an
    ongoing attack.

  * _Untrusted content_: An attacker could inject malicious code into the
    report, opening a vulnerability in the receiving domain. Implementers are
    advised to take precautions against evaluating the contents of the report.

  * _Report snooping_: An attacker could create a bogus TLSRPT record to
    receive statistics about a domain the attacker does not own. Since an
    attacker able to poison DNS is already able to receive counts of SMTP
    connections (and, in fact, actual SMTP message payloads) today, this does
    not present a significant new vulnerability.


# Appendix 1: JSON Report Schema

The JSON schema is derived from the HPKP JSON schema [@!RFC7469] (cf. Section 3)

```
{
  "organization-name": organization-name,
  "date-range": {
	"start-datetime": date-time,
	"end-datetime": date-time
  },
  "contact-info": email-address,
  "report-id": report-id,
  "policy": {
	"policy-type": policy-type,
	"policy-string": policy-string,
	"policy-domain": domain,
	"mx-host": mx-host-pattern
	},
  "report-items": [
	{
	  "result-type": result-type,
	  "sending-mta-ip": ip-address,
	  "receiving-mx-hostname": receiving-mx-hostname,
	  "message-count": message-count,
	  "additional-information": additional-info-uri
	}
  ]
}
```
Figure: JSON Report Format

  * `organization-name`: The name of the organization responsible for the
    report. It is provided as a string.
  * `date-time`: The date-time indicates the start- and end-times for the
    report range. It is provided as a string formatted according to
   Section 5.6, "Internet Date/Time Format", of [@!RFC3339].
  * `email-address`: The contact information for a responsible party of the
    report. It is provided as a string formatted according to Section 3.4.1,
    "Addr-Spec", of [@!RFC5322].
  * `report-id`: A unique identifier for the report. Report authors may use
    whatever scheme they prefer to generate a unique identifier. It is provided
    as a string.
  * `policy-type`: The type of policy that was applied by the sending domain.
    Presently, the only two valid choices are `tlsa` and `sts`. It is provided
    as a string.
  * `policy-string`: The string serialization of the policy, whether TLSA
    record or STS policy. Any linefeeds from the original policy MUST be
    replaced with [SP]. TODO: Help with specifics.
  * `domain`: The Policy Domain upon which the policy was applied. For messages
    sent to `user@example.com` this field would contain `example.com`. It is
    provided as a string.
  * `mx-host-pattern`: The pattern of MX hostnames from the applied policy. It
    is provided as a string, and is interpreted in the same manner as the
    "Checking of Wildcard Certificates" rules in Section 6.4.3 of [@!RFC6125].
  * `result-type`: A value from the _Result Types_ section above.
  * `ip-address`: The IP address of the sending MTA that attempted the STARTTLS
    connection. It is provided as a string representation of an IPv4 or IPv6
    address.
  * `receiving-mx-hostname`: The hostname of the receiving MTA MX record with
    which the sending MTA attempted to negotiate a STARTTLS connection.
  * `message-count`: The number of (attempted) messages that match the relevant
    `result-type` for this section.
  * `additional-info-uri`: An optional URI pointing to additional information
    around the relevant `result-type`. For example, this URI might host the
    complete certificate chain presented during an attempted STARTTLS session.


# Appendix 2: Example JSON Report
```
{
	"organization-name": "Company-X",
	"date-range": {
		"start-datetime": "2016-04-01T00:00:00Z",
		"end-datetime": "2016-04-01T23:59:59Z"
	},
	"contact-info": "sts-reporting@company-x.com",
	"report-id": "5065427c-23d3-47ca-b6e0-946ea0e8c4be",
	"policy": {
		"policy-type": "sts",
		"policy-string": "TODO: Add me",
		"policy-domain": "company-y.com",
		"mx-host": "*.mail.company-y.com"
	},
	"report-items": [{
		"result-type": "ExpiredCertificate",
		"sending-mta-ip": "98.136.216.25",
		"receiving-mx-hostname": "mx1.mail.company-y.com",
		"message-count": 100
	}, {
		"result-type": "StarttlsNotSupported",
		"sending-mta-ip": "98.22.33.99",
		"receiving-mx-hostname": "mx2.mail.company-y.com",
		"message-count": 200,
		"additional-information": "hxxps://reports.company-x.com/
                  report_info?id=5065427c-23d3#StarttlsNotSupported"
	}]
}
```
Figure: Example JSON report for a messages from Company-X to Company-Y, where 
100 messages were attempted to Company Y servers with an expired certificate 
and 200 messages were attempted to Company Y servers that did not successfully
respond to the `STARTTLS` command.



{backmatter}
